You all sure are of the opinion that rationality can help you improve in a great number of areas. Today I want to talk about how rationality relates to magic.
Certainly there is a deep bound between both Arts. The focus of magic, as well as of rationality, lies in the understanding of the human mind. Specifically, both magician and rationalist must be able to acknowledge the biases that make us reason systematically wrong. I have learned a great deal from magic; actually, I was led to cognitive science and from there to rationality when researching about the psychology of magic. But not only magicians benefit from their displays. The audience can also be moved to understand that they can be fallible, and hopefully start reading about rationality or at least about magic. Not certainly the usual case, but if only I have moved one person to learn something new, then it would have been worth the effort.

Talking about people learning magic, you all sure remember Eliezer's essay in which he proposes, half seriously, half jokingly, that science should be hidden away, so that more people would want to learn it, affected by the scarcity effect. Well, I think magic suggests a clear counterexample to the proposal, as it is clearly perceived as secret knowledge, yet people do not make a sincere effort to learn it. Sure, they will ask me "How do you do it? I want to do it too!", but then they will not buy a deck and try to come up with the trick they saw, nor even search on the web books on the topic.

After this effect, someone told me: "Yeah, you may have practiced a lot. But can your quick hands do something other than cheap tricks?" I did not say a single word in response. I shut up, and did the impossible. [first climax]

But wait! There is something above making that which others deem impossible. A magician will employ its creativity and knowledge to bring forth that which others cannot even imagine. [second climax]
