(Probablemente sea útil poner ejemplos de cada una de ellas, así que buscaré alguno. Y si se os ocurre, ponedlo.)


###Before you get to problems:
* Whenever a definition is introduced, write down (or at least verbalize) its negation (notice how the quantifiers are arranged)
* Whenever a new concept is introduced, think how must a problem be to "be nice" (for example, symmetry is cool or time dependance is a hassle, etc)
* Don´t think of things as things-in-themselves but as things-that-affect-other-things (a matrix is a linear aplication, a complex function is an endomorphism, a group is (a subgroup of) a permuter)
* Find people studying the same things as you. People above your level can help you with difficult questions. People below your level make for great teaching practice.


###Maths and Physics. Strategy: 
* Define the problem. How does it look like to have solved it? What about the general case?
* Solve it symbolically and substitute numerically to checkyour results.
* Substitute numerically (using always multiples of 2, 5 or 10 for example), it might be trivially trivial (example:  0 = 0)
* Try solving it from first principles. 
* Write down each of your assumptions. Why is each one of them necessary?
* If first principles fail, find an easier version of the problem which is solvable. Was the difficulty computational or intrinsic? (Try approximating or simplifying some of the conditions.)
* If a problem is too easy solve the general case. Why was it easy?
* Try cross-modeling (see if a model for a different object can be used for the one you are trying to solve.)
* If you only want the solution don´t feel bad if you use overpowered techniques. 
* If the problem has many sections for example a) Do case k=2. b) Do case k=5. c) Do case k=n. You may go directly to c) and just write down the answers to the previous ones.
* Divide and conquer. Try writing down a series of subproblems that would solve the problem at task if solved. If one of the steps seems unsolvable or is just plainly false rethink the overall strategy.
* Think of the easiest non-trivial instance of an abstract problem to see how it works and find a possible counterexample.
* Trust pattern matching. Go back to similar exercises and see whether the same techniques apply.
* Optimize learning, not self-esteem. If you have spent too much time on a problem, seek/ask for the solution, understand it and move along.


###Maths and Physics. Techniques: 
* Induction: Vacuous statements are trivially true, you may not write the base case (take n=0 and use conventions : empty product is = 1 , etc)  
           Sometimes asumming the n-1 th term is notationally more convenient than assuming th nth term.
* Construction: I they ask for something with properties A,B,C. Construct something with property A, some other thing with B, another with C
  another with A&B , ... , and finally you will get to one with A&B&C.
* Calculus (Limits, integrals): Substitute everything with its 3rd or 4th order Taylor expansion.
* Mechanics: Consider adding or substracting a dimension (sometimes in 3-space it is cumbersome but the plane makes the problem intuitive)
* Linear algebra: Write everything with geometrical vocabulary and functional notation. Don`t write any matrices.
* General: Assume you are writing in a blackboard (usually paper-writing is too linear, from  the upper left corner to the lower right one)


###To avoid pitfalls: 
* State your assumptions every time you are making one. 
* Ask yourself in every step if you are making an implicit assumption. 
* State your formulas before using them.
* Write down the dimensional formula next to the conceptual one and with the factors in the same order. 
  * Remember that operators affect dimensions because diffrentials hace dimensions. 
  * Remember that  functions usually? take numbers or "artificial" dimensions (for example: sin(a*[Time]) implies that [a]=[Time]^-1)
* Explain the procedure as you go. 
* Take limits if it makes sense (make the distance go to 0 or to infinity, make the time go to infinity, etc)

//The following part is inspired by "How To Solve It", by Polya
//I suggest we reorganize the file, as the sections are not well defined
###Before facing the problem

###Understanding the problem
The main objective in this part of the problem solving heuristic is to rightly program our intuition to search for ideas in the appropiate cluster. 
###Devising a plan
As pointed out by the previous section, this is mainly a S1 activity, where we rely in association heuristics to brute force for a clever insight.
###Executing the plan
Once a bright idea is found, we need to call S2 in order to systematically carry out the steps of the plan generated by such an idea.
###Checking the result
We will need to rely again on the executive function to search for possible mistakes in our solution. Once we are satisfied with it, we can try to come up with better solutions or let S1 internalize the technique or the result.
* Train common sense. Be alarmed when the mass of a ship is close to that of a star cluster, or if the capacity of a battery is greater than New York's energy consumption per month.
